# Fortissimo #
Matt Butcher <matt@aleph-null.tv>
Copyright (c) 2010

Fortissimo is a PHP framework. It's key features are:

* _Rapid_: You can write applications quickly.
* _Scalable_: Unlike other frameworks, Fortissimo is designed to scale across servers.
* _Chain-of-command, not MVC_: Fortissimo uses a different base design pattern, called
  Chain-of-Command. CoC is easy, makes the most of reusable components, and scales 
  very well. Take a look at commands.xml to see how this works.
* _Well documented_: Every function in the library is documented, and the 
  documentation can easily be extracted and converted to HTML (see below). In 
  addition, your applications are self-documenting, making maintenance easier.
* _NSFW_: There are No Stupid Fortissimo Wrappers. In other words, you don't need to 
  learn a new API that simply wraps basic PHP functions. Fortissimo is thin.

## Installation (Early Release Version) ##

Eventually, Fortissimo will be installed using either a Phar package or a PEAR 
package. For now, though, it must be installed manually.

### Prerequisites ###

Install Phing, PHPDocumentor, and PHPUnit. For template support, install Twig. All of these are PEAR packages.

* [Phing](http://phing.info)
* [PHPDocumentor](http://phpdoc.org)
* [PHPUnit](http://phpunit.de)
* [Twig Template engine](http://www.twig-project.org)

Phing is absolutely required. PhpDocumentor and PHPUnit are good to have, but are not strictly necessary. They may become required later.

Twig is a template engine, and the FortissimoTemplate command requires Twig. See 
the next section for more.

When you *deploy* a Fortissimo application, only Twig is required (and it is only required if you are using Fortissimo's built-in template support). Thus, on a production environment, you will probably only need Twig.

### Installing Twig ###

[Twig](http://www.twig-project.org) is a template engine for PHP, and is similar to Django's template engine, as well as the Java Velocity engine. However, it adds many speed, internationalization, and security features, which makes it a better alternative for Fortissimo than plain PHP templates.

To install Twig, you should run the following commands:

  $ pear channel-discover pear.twig-project.org
  $ pear install twig/Twig
  
(At the time of this writing, one must install twig/Twig-beta, as it has not yet reached its final release.)
  
If you do not have PEAR, you can find alternate installation instructions [in the Twig documentation](http://www.twig-project.org/installation). Make sure that Twig is in the PHP library path, though, if you installed manually.

### Installing Fortissimo ###

To begin, download Fortissimo and untar it into a directory.

To start a new Fortissimo project, execute the `fff.php` command. To create a new
project called `MyProject`, run this command:

  $ /path/to/fff.php MyProject
  
This will create a directory called MyProject/ and stub it out with the appropriate
files.

From there, you can begin by editing the `commands.xml` file. You can write your 
own commands and put them in the project's includes/ directory, where Fortissimo
will automatically find them. For examples, see the commands in `src/core/Fortissimo`.

To run a Fortissimo application as a web app, simply ensure that the project directory is visible to the web server, and that the web server can correctly execute PHP files.

For example, if MyProject is inside of the root directory of a webserver on 
the domain example.com, then you should be able to access the page in a browser
using the URL http://example.com/MyProject. Note that that request will execute the 
default request.

#### Project Documentation ####

Your project will contain its own documentation in MyProject/doc

Projects are also self-documenting (assuming you write commands using 
BaseFortissimoCommand). You can run `phing explain` in your project's root, and 
documentation on all requests (and their commands) will be automatically generated
and displayed.

### Generating API Documentation ###

To generate API documentation for Fortissimo, go to the base installation directory
and execute the following:

    $ phing doc

This will generate robust HTML-formatted API documentation, which will be available in 
`doc/api/`. 

## ABOUT THE LICENSE ##
Fortissimo is licensed under the MIT license. The version of QueryPath that is
included within Fortissimo is dual-licensed under LGPL 2.1 and MIT.

You may build applications on top of Fortissimo without releasing your own code
under an Open Source (or Free Software) license. Of course, the Fortissimo team
is very grateful for any improvements you contribute back to the framework. But
we believe that the best person to choose how you license your software is you.
