# Fortissimo Quickstart

This short document describes how to quickly create a Fortissimo application.

## Install Fortissimo

See the main installation documents or visit [the home page](http://github.com/technosophos/Fortissimo).

## Run the Generator

Run the Fortissimo generator to create a new application.

    $ Fortissimo/fff.php MyProject
  
This will create a new project directory called MyProject. Inside of that project
you will have the Fortissimo runtime and all of the tools you need to build a 
new Fortissimo app.

## Configure Your Webserver

Make sure that your webserver can see the src directory of your project. Often this can be
accomplished with something like this command:

    $ ln -s MyProject/src /var/www/html/MyProject

On a Mac, you can very easily make this visible on your local host by linking to your Sites
directory:

    $ ln -s MyProject/src ~/Sites/MyProject
  
This will allow you to access it via the URL: `http://localhost/~yourusername/MyProject`

## Create a Command

Create a new Fortissimo command by adding a new file in the `src/includes`
directory.

### A Hello World Command

Here is a simple Hello World command, stored in `src/includes/HelloWorld.cmd.php`:

    class HelloWorld extends BaseFortissimoCommand {
    
      public function expects() {
        return $this->description('A simple hello world script.');
      }
    
      public function doCommand() {
        print '<h1>Hello World</h1>';
      }
    }

This is a simple command that prints `Hello World` to the client. Typically, a 
command extends `BaseFortissimoCommand` and implements the two required methods:

 * expects(): This is a documentation function, and is absolutely required. The 
   example above is the bare minimum allowed by Fortissimo. It teaches Fortissimo
   about your app, and also provides developer documentation.
 * doCommand(): This method is the workhorse. It handles all of the command processing.
   If it returns a value, the value will be placed into the application's context, which 
   means other commands can access and use that value.
   
Now that we have a command, we can map it to a request.
   
## Creating a Request
 
Clients (browsers) make requests. We map a request to a chain of commands. The process looks something like this:

    browser -> 
              request->
                       command1
                          |
                       command2
                          |
                     <-command3
            <-request
    browser          

In the above, the request runs three commands before returning to the client. We'll look at 
a much simpler example here. In this example, we will create a simple request that has 
only one command.

We will use the HelloWorld command we created above.

The commands.php file is located in `src/config/commands.php`. Edit this file.

To create a new request, we add a simple section to the PHP configuration file:

    <?php
    Config::request('hello')->usesCommand('helloworld')->whichInvokes('HelloWorld');
    ?>

This tells Fortissimo that when a browser requests `http://yoursite.com/hello` (or `http://yoursite.com/index.php?ff=hello`) then it should execute the `helloworld` command. This
is accomplished by Fortissimo invoking `HelloWorld`. Essentially, what that means is that it
will call `HelloWorld::doCommand()`. Using our stick diagram, then, this looks like this:

    browser -> 
              hello->
                    <-helloworld (HelloWorld::doCommand())
            <-hello
    browser

We can easily add lots of commands to a single request. In fact, we could very easily modify the 
above to emit 'Hello World' twice:

    <?php
    Config::request('hello')
      ->usesCommand('helloworld')->whichInvokes('HelloWorld')
      ->usesCommand('helloworld2')->whichInvokes('HelloWorld');
    ?>
  
All we did is copy the command again, changing the name of the second one to 'helloworld2'. It must
have a different name because Fortissimo uses names to keep track of what commands are executed 
inside of a request.

Again with the stick diagram:

      browser -> 
                hello->
                       helloworld (HelloWorld::doCommand())
                           |
                     <-helloworld2 (HelloWorld::doCommand())
              <-hello
      browser

Fortissimo's hello request executes two commands (helloworld and helloworld2) and then returns.

### Using the Built-in Echo Command

We could have done the entire Hello World script with even less work. We could have just used
the `FortissimoEcho` command (located in `src/core/Fortissimo/FortissimoEcho.cmd.php`):

    <?php
    Config::request('hello')
      // Our command that we created above:
      ->usesCommand('helloworld')
        ->whichInvokes('HelloWorld')
      // The built-in FortissimoEcho command:
      ->usesCommand('more')
        ->whichInvokes('FortissimoEcho')
        ->withParam('text')->whoseValueIs('Hello Again')
    ;
    ?>

The above request will print output something like this:

    <h1>Hello World</h1>
    Hello Again
  
The first line comes from our HelloWorld class, and the second from the FortissimoEcho class,
which provides a great example of how to write Fortissimo commands. Here's the source:

    class FortissimoEcho extends BaseFortissimoCommand {

      public function expects() {
        return $this
          ->description('Echo the contents of the "text" parameter to standard output.')
          ->usesParam('text', 'The text to echo.')
          ;
      }

      public function doCommand() {
        print $this->param('text');
      }
    }
  
This class implements the same two functions, expects() and doCommand(). But it uses a parameter,
so it is slightly more complicated.

In the expects() function, it declares its parameter with `->usesParam()`. This tells Fortissimo
what the name of the parameter is, and provides a one-sentence description for humans. (Run 
`phing explain` to see the documentation).

The `doCommand()` function accesses that parameter (`#this->param()`), and prints it to the output.

Note that no escaping or filtering is done on the text. We could very simply filter the text 
parameter to allow only plain text:

    class FortissimoEcho extends BaseFortissimoCommand {

      public function expects() {
        return $this
          ->description('Echo the contents of the "text" parameter to standard output.')
          ->usesParam('text', 'The text to echo.')
          ->withFilter('string')
          ;
      }

      public function doCommand() {
        print $this->param('text');
      }
    }

The `->withFilter()` function says that the text param should be filtered using the 'string' filter.
This takes advantage of PHP's built-in filtering system, and you can read more about it in the 
API documentation. But in a nutshell, it will strip markup and non-printing characters out of the
`text` before `doCommand()` executes.

Filters, then, are a good way of adding some security to your application.

## Moving On

So far, you have seen some light coding samples. Here are some good next steps:

  * Look at the [built-in commands](http://github.com/technosophos/Fortissimo/tree/master/Fortissimo/skel/src/core/Fortissimo/) provided with Fortissimo. 
    * `FortissimoContextDump` is a good example of a simple command. 
    * `FortissimoPHPInfo` shows some other good techniques, and is also very simple.
    * `FortissimoFileLoader` is a good example of a complex command.
  * Read the API docs. In particular, look at BaseFortissimoCommand. That's the class that gets
    it done for you.
  * Use [Phing](http://phing.info) to find out what you can do. Try `phing -l` from inside of the
    project's main directory. It reads the build.xml file and displays useful information.
  * Look at the [Twig template engine](http://www.twig-project.org). This is the template engine
    for Fortissimo, and it is pretty darn cool. You can use the `FortissimoTemplate` command
    to run Twig.

### Databases and Stuff

Most applications uses databases or data storage of one type or another. Fortissimo uses a concept
of Datasources to handle this sort of thing. And the default datasource provided by Fortissimo
is a Mongo database. To learn more about this, see `FortissimoMongoDatasource.php`.

You can, of course, use any existing database library. If you write a MySQL datasource 
implementation, I'd love to hear about it. It'd make a great contribution to Fortissimo.